Commodities were a bright spot for markets last 
year (see Exhibit 180). The S&P GSCI returned 
23%, topping all other major asset classes for a 
second consecutive year. But this impressive gain 
belied a more nuanced reality, as returns reached 
54% by early June, only to be halved in the 
second half of the year. Investors also faced a wide 
dispersion among individual commodities and their 
source of returns. In contrast to the index’s overall 
strength, both industrial metals and precious 
metals suffered losses last year. And while the 
energy subindex outperformed with a 39% gain, 
the bulk of this came from positive carry, or the 
additional return holders of a commodity get when 
the futures curve is strongly downward sloping, 
called “backwardation.” The appreciation in spot 
energy prices was a much smaller 14%.  


The disjointed nature of these returns reflects 
the tug-of-war between bullish supply-side 
pressures and bearish demand-side concerns that is 
likely to continue in the year ahead. Although years 
of underinvestment are an underlying support for 
many commodity prices, a deeper global economic 
slowdown could quickly undermine demand, 
especially given the still-uncertain trajectory of 
China’s economy amid its shifting COVID policies. 


Against these risks, we note that global 
inventories have remained low across most 
commodities despite months of weak Chinese 
demand—a sign of equally weak supply trends. A 
thinner inventory buffer also leaves prices sensitive 
to potential supply disruptions in politically 
unstable areas, such as South America for base 
metals, or—discussed further below—Russia and 
the Middle East for oil. Given these crosscurrents, 
we believe that risks around our base case are 
roughly balanced for industrial metals and oil 
prices this year. As for gold, we remain doubtful 
about its ability to provide investors with a reliable 
hedge against inflation or political risk given its 
notable failure to do so in the past year.  


Oil: High Risks, Low Inventories
Oil prices last year were driven by geopolitical 
developments to a degree not seen since the 
turbulent 1970s. As seen in Exhibit 181, close 
to 10% of global oil production found itself at 
risk of disruption virtually overnight in the wake 
of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and the ensuing 
rollout of Western sanctions. Given already low 
global oil inventories and thin spare capacity, oil 
prices understandably spiked higher, reaching $124 
at their peak closing level last March. 


Prices have since fallen back below pre-war 
levels. This surprising retracement reflects not only 
the failure of supply risks to materialize, but also 
a combination of bearish developments, including 
an unprecedented 200-million-barrel release from 
the US Strategic Petroleum Reserve, a COVID-
driven slump in Chinese oil demand and fears of 
an impending recession. 


Although oil prices have receded, the bullish 
risks that underpinned their initial spike higher 
have not disappeared. The full effect of European 
sanctions on Russia will not be visible in energy 
markets until the first quarter of this year. These 
curbs directly impact 0.5 million b/d of seaborne 
crude oil and 1.1 million b/d of refined products. 
While Russia has so far been successful at 
redirecting crude exports to India and China, this 
strategy is starting to show some limits (see Exhibit 
182). Moreover, it will be difficult for Russia to 
replicate this strategy in refined products, as both 
China and India were net exporters in this category 
last year.


As a result, close to 2 million b/d of Russian 
supplies to Europe remain at risk. Consensus 
currently expects a net loss of less than half that 
amount, increasing the risk of an upside surprise. 
Upward pressure on energy prices could also 
arise from supply disruptions in other countries, 
given geopolitical tensions in the Middle East and 
domestic instability in Libya and other exporting 
countries.  


To be sure, the demand for oil faces an equally 
high degree of risk amid a potential US recession and 
the still-uncertain trajectory of China’s economy. We 
estimate that Chinese demand fell by 0.5 million b/d 
on average last year, marking the first annual decline 
since 1990 (see Exhibit 183). While a successful 
reopening of China’s economy could help offset 
weaker oil demand elsewhere, a more protracted 
COVID wave could exacerbate demand concerns. 
For now, we expect global demand to remain on an 
upward trajectory in our base case, exceeding pre-
COVID levels by year-end.  


Meeting this demand will require continuing 
growth from US producers, as OPEC has already 
ramped its output back to pre-COVID levels 
and has limited spare capacity. But to incentivize 
additional drilling, oil prices must remain high 
enough to overcome the cost inflation and self-
imposed capital discipline now holding back 
US production. In contrast, lower prices and 
disappointing demand would likely restrain 
production growth. Tellingly, the November and 
December oil price slump was rapidly followed by 
a decline in US drilling and completion activity, 
while OPEC immediately announced a production 
cut to rescue prices. 


Given these moving pieces, we expect WTI 
prices to trade in a $70–100 range by year-end, 
which would imply upside from current levels. 
But we are mindful of the many risks that could 
undermine this forecast—including a US recession, 
another wave of global COVID infections or a 
quick resolution to the conflict in Ukraine—any 
one of which could push prices down to cost 
support near $60. That said, we would not expect 
these lower prices to be sustained for an extended 
period, given producers’ likely reaction. There are 
also upside risks. Any additional supply disruptions 
would be magnified by still-low inventories, which could push prices above our 
forecast range, as happened last year. 


Although we do not have an active tactical 
allocation to oil, we do continue to recommend 
a small overweight to the US midstream sector, 
which benefits from strong cash flows and less 
direct exposure to oil price volatility.


Gold: Not as Advertised
Since its meteoric rise in the 1970s, gold has been 
hailed as an effective hedge against inflation. But 
that reputation was tarnished in 2022, as gold 
prices spent most of the year trading in negative 
territory despite the highest inflation in four 
decades. This disappointing performance was 
yet another reminder that gold is subject to a 
multitude of often opposing factors. Case in point: 
the impact of last year’s inflation surprise was 
largely offset by the combination of higher interest 
rates and the surge in the US dollar, with which 
gold tends to be negatively correlated.


These types of crosscurrents leave us tactically 
neutral on gold again this year. As seen in Exhibit 
185, our expectation for softer nominal and 
real interest rates removes one of last year’s key 
headwinds to gold. Yet real rates are still likely 
to remain in positive territory, which historically 
has resulted in lower-than-average gold returns 
(see Exhibit 186). After all, positive interest rates 
create an opportunity cost of holding gold, which 
generates no cash flow or yield income and must 
be physically stored, often at a cost. 


We also do not see a compelling argument for 
investors to replace their US dollar holdings with 
gold this year, given our still constructive view on 
the currency. Consider that since 1971, there has 
been only a 24% chance of a meaningful gold 
rally of more than 10% in periods when the dollar 
was stable or rising. In fact, most meaningful 
gold rallies have happened when the US dollar 
was depreciating. Put simply, when the dollar is 
appreciating—a situation we expect this year—
the low probability of strong gold returns has 
not historically justified the risk and volatility of 
holding the yellow metal.   


Still, there are a few factors that could buoy 
gold, not the least of which is a US recession that 
might rekindle demand for gold as a safe-haven 
asset. Gold also stands to benefit if currently 
underweight investors increase their positions 
(see Exhibit 187), which now stand 28% below 
their recent peak in early 2022 and back at levels 
last seen in early 2020. Demand from EM central 
banks looking to diversify their FX reserves into 
gold is another source of upside risk. The latest 
data from the World Gold Council already points 
to record-high purchases in the most recent 
quarter, with countries such as Turkey, China and 
India leading the pack. Further geopolitical strife 
could even accelerate this trend.  


Given these contradictory factors, we remain 
neutral on gold until a clearer opportunity 
presents itself. 