Last year reminded commodity investors that it’s 
never wise to count chickens before they hatch. 
Following two years of strong performance that 
had reinforced investors’ belief in a new supercycle, 
the GSCI instead fell 9% in 2023 (see Exhibit 
172). The losses were broad-based, with negative 
price performance across energy, agriculture and 
industrial metals.  


The high prices of commodities coming into 
last year proved to be the antidote for even higher 
prices, as they incentivized a mix of demand 
conservation, investment in supply capacity and 
productivity improvements. This dynamic was 
particularly visible in the oil patch last year, where 
production exceeded expectations in several 
countries despite producers’ capital discipline. The 
resulting spare capacity is likely to limit upside 
again this year, barring major supply disruptions.   


Outside of commonly traded commodity 
indices, there were a couple bright spots. Uranium 
saw a strong rally, gaining 90% last year. We 
continue to recommend a small overweight to 
uranium, a position we initiated in March 2022 
based on our view that the widening gap between 
supply and demand would push prices higher. With 
supply being slow to respond despite last year’s 
rally, we expect uranium prices to rise further 
this year. 


Gold also stood out last year, posting a 13% 
return. However, we think the backdrop for gold is 
more challenging in 2024, given near-record prices 
and a more mixed fundamental outlook. 


Oil: Threading the Needle
“It ain’t what you don’t know that gets you into 
trouble. It’s what you know for sure that just ain’t 
so.” That quote, often attributed to Mark Twain, 
proved apt for oil investors last year, as some 
widely expected developments failed to materialize. 
The almost universal expectation that oil prices 
would surge due to Russian sanctions limiting 
supply did not occur. Instead, Russia successfully 
redirected most of these sanctioned exports to 
China and India. Predictions of a slowdown in US 
production growth also missed the mark, as US 
producers recorded their fastest growth rate since 
2019. With these bullish catalysts not happening 
the way people thought they would, oil prices 
ended the year with a modest 11% loss.


Oil begins the year trading at the lower end of 
its annual range. However, this does not negate the 
potential downside risks for 2024, as we anticipate 
challenges stemming from both demand and 
supply dynamics. Sustaining the recent demand 
growth rate will be challenging now that the post-
pandemic recovery has largely run its course. We 
predict that demand growth will return to a trend-
like pace of 1.0–1.5 million b/d this year in the 
absence of a recession, a significant deceleration 
from last year’s 2.3 million b/d increase (see 
Exhibit 173).


This slower demand growth will likely require 
restraint on the part of producers to keep the 
market in balance. For their part, US producers 
have consistently demonstrated discipline in their 
allocation of capital. Over the last 12 months, these 
producers have returned 49% of their cash flows 
to investors compared to 37% per year between 
2014 and 2019. However, productivity has also 
improved in recent years, such that the same dollar 
of capital spending now generates more oil. As a 
result, US production is likely to continue growing 
despite ongoing capital discipline. 


The potential for output restraint among other 
non-OPEC producers is just as dubious. Brazil, 
Guyana and Canada have all experienced a notable 
uptick in their oil output recently. What’s 
more, their production is unlikely to be 
affected by oil prices, as it stems from 
years of investment in offshore and oil 
sands projects that are just now coming 
online. Ultimately, oil production from 
these projects could crowd out further 
expansion from US shale. 
The high prices of commodities 
coming into last year proved to be the 
antidote for even higher prices.


Against this backdrop, the burden of managing 
supply relative to demand rests with OPEC, where 
there is arguably little room for further reductions. 
OPEC production already stands at 10-year lows 
and has been higher than current levels 88% of 
the time in the past 20 years73 (see Exhibit 174). 
Similarly, the production of Saudi Arabia—often 
considered the ultimate swing producer—has 
seldom fallen below its current level. Going 
forward, OPEC’s determination to support prices 
could be tested if further production cuts become 
necessary. Indeed, at OPEC’s November 2023 
meeting, the decision to further reduce production 
sparked internal disagreements, leading to Angola’s 
exit from the organization in protest.


Considering these challenges, we expect WTI 
prices to trade in a $60–80 range by year-end, 
implying minimal upside from current levels. That 
said, we are mindful of several risks that could 
potentially undermine our forecast. The likelihood 
of supply disruptions is growing given prevalent 
geopolitical uncertainty in the Middle East, as well 
as instability in countries like Libya and Nigeria. 
At the same time, global oil production outages 
excluding Russia currently stand near their lowest 
level in 10 years (see Exhibit 175).  While any price 
spike would likely be temporary given OPEC’s 
historically high spare capacity (see Exhibit 176), 
a spike could still cause significant disruptions in 
the short term. There are also legitimate downside 
risks to oil prices, including a US recession, an 
abrupt reversal of OPEC cuts or even a lack of 
production discipline among OPEC members. 


In light of these various crosscurrents, we 
do not have an active tactical allocation to oil. 
However, we continue to recommend a small 
overweight position to the US midstream sector, 
which benefits from strong cash flows, growing 
volumes and less direct exposure to oil price 
volatility.   


Gold: Breakout Mania
There is nothing quite as captivating to investors as 
a new all-time high—like that reached by gold in 
late December last year, when its price hit $2,077. 
This milestone not only fueled expectations for 
further gains, but also reinforced investors’ faith 
in several bullish catalysts for gold. These included 
so-called de-dollarization of central banks’ 
reserves, falling interest rates and investors’ search 
for safe-haven assets in times of global uncertainty. 


But as investors, we must avoid fitting a 
narrative to an asset’s price movements. Gold 
did indeed rally alongside bonds late last year, 
but the catalyst for the bond move was signs 
of moderating inflation—whereas gold has the 
reputation of being an inflation hedge. Moreover, 
most assets rallied during last year’s fourth quarter: 
gold’s 11.6% return was similar to the 11.7% 
gain of US equities but higher than the 6.8% 
advance of the US aggregate bond index. It is also 
worth highlighting that this isn’t gold’s first time 
surpassing $2,000. In fact, it also exceeded this 
level in August 2020 and March 2022, but reversed 
course shortly after on both occasions. 


For the year ahead, we see several crosscurrents 
impacting the outlook for gold. To be sure, gold 
has a few supportive factors. There is scope for 
investors to increase their ETF exposure to gold, 
as current positions are more than 25 million 
ounces below their 2020 peak (see Exhibit 177). 
Emerging market central banks are also increasing 
their exposure, as they continue to diversify some 
of their reserves into gold. Based on data up to the 
third quarter of last year, these central banks added 
around 1,000 tonnes of gold to their balance sheets 
last year, accounting for nearly 30% of global gold 
production. However, this is not an incremental 
source of demand, as they purchased about the 
same amount the previous year (see Exhibit 178). 


As was the case last year, our expectation 
for lower nominal interest rates could also 
benefit gold. Recall that lower rates reduce the 
opportunity cost of holding gold, which doesn’t 
yield any income and needs to be stored, often 
at a cost. This interest rate dynamic can also be 
indirectly observed through gold’s positive reaction 
to past Federal Reserve rate cuts. In fact, in the six 
months following the first rate cut of a cycle, gold 
prices have rallied 60% of the time, by a median of 
6.2% (see Exhibit 179). 


However, the fact that disinflation is pushing 
interest rates lower could weaken this dynamic. That 
has been the case historically, as real interest rates 
have been a more important driver of gold prices 
than nominal interest rates. Falling but positive real 
rates, which we expect this year, have historically 
been roughly neutral for gold prices compared to 
their unconditional performance. Capitalizing on 
these rate movements also requires precise timing, as 
the median gold return in the six months before the 
first Federal Reserve rate cut has been a 1.9% loss, 
with only a 50% chance of a gain. 


We do not expect the US dollar 
to provide a clear catalyst to gold 
prices either. While there is a negative 
correlation between gold and the 
dollar, it has historically taken a large 
dollar depreciation to push gold prices 
meaningfully higher, which is not our 
central case. In fact, we expect the dollar 
to appreciate this year. 
There is nothing quite as captivating 
to investors as a new all-time high—
like that reached by gold in late 
December last year.


In short, we do not believe these conflicting 
factors convincingly justify today’s already high 
gold prices, leaving us neutral until a clearer 
opportunity presents itself.  